---
title: "Advent of Code 2021 Recap"
tags: [Challenges,Advent,Rust]
---
2021 is now over and I have completed the advent of code in Rust. Here are my findings.

<!-- truncate -->

### Rust
Rust has its quirks when writing the code, but the error messages are very clear. 

Having worked in other pointer/reference handling languages (C++ mainly), it was pretty easy to pick up. 

As I was expecting, performance is absolutely incredible as well.

Making trees and graphs is pretty complicated though. Since Rust does a lot of checks on variable lifetimes and borrows as well as stack size, you can't easily have pointers to nodes within a node structure. Most of the problems I ended up a pattern that seems to be called a "memory arena" by the Rust community. In this pattern you keep a list of all the nodes, usually in a vector for instant random access, and each node contains the index of other nodes it's referring to instead of a pointer to it. If the tree/graph doesn't change, it's pretty easy to use, but if you need to modify it, it becomes a little more complicated although doable.

### Problems were overall good
Most of the problems were pretty easy to solve algorithmically. Some problems took me more time as I mentioned above because I'm not used to creating trees and graphs in Rust. Another notable mention is problem 24 which is a little more complicated to solve and takes a lot of experimentations before you can figure out how you're supposed to reduce the search space. I wished they didn't put that as the last problem.

What I missed the most out of all the problems compared to previous years was a set a problem to made you evolve a previous solution. This was usually done as a assembly-like language you had to write a computer emulator for. I hope they bring something similar back in future years.

### Final thoughts
Overall very fun and Rust was a blast to use.

All my code and inputs are available in [advent2021](https://github.com/lavoiecsh/lavoiecsh.github.io/tree/master/code/advent2021) for those interested.
